Supreme Court Justices Seem Incredulous At Repeated Racial Bias In Jury Selection
https://www.npr.org/2019/03/20/705211168/supreme-court-justices-seem-incredulous-at-repeated-racial-bias-in-jury-selectio

                People line up to enter the Supreme Court in Washington, Wednesday.
                
                
                    
                    J. Scott Applewhite/AP
                    
                
hide caption
People line up to enter the Supreme Court in Washington, Wednesday.The U.S. Supreme Court signaled strongly on Wednesday that it is likely to rule for a death-row inmate in Mississippi who was prosecuted six times for the same crime by a prosecutor with a history of racial bias in jury selection. The arguments, more passionate and fact-filled than usual, also had a surprise ending when Justice Clarence Thomas for the first time in three years, posed a question. Though his colleagues focused mainly on the prosecutor's exclusion of African American jurors, Thomas asked whether the defense had struck any white jurors. No, replied defense lawyer Sheri Johnson. For all practical purposes, they had all been struck already, leaving just one black juror. 
                Curtis Flowers, who's murder case has gone to trial six times, pictured in 2017. The Supreme Court heard arguments in it Wednesday.
                
                
                    
                    AP via provided by Mississippi Department of Corrections
                    
                
hide caption
Curtis Flowers, who's murder case has gone to trial six times, pictured in 2017. The Supreme Court heard arguments in it Wednesday.For decades, the Supreme Court has wrestled with the question of racial discrimination in jury selection, setting down its most rigorous rules in 1986. But policing the application of those rules in the lower courts has proved problematic. Wednseday's case involved the conduct of Douglas Evans, a district attorney in Winona Mississippi and his pursuit of a conviction against Curtis Flowers, a black man who prior to this case had no criminal record. Months after a quadruple murder in Winona, he was arraigned, tried, convicted and sentenced to death. He has been on death row for 22 years. During that time, the state supreme court three times threw out his murder conviction for prosecutorial misconduct.The misconduct was not some technicality. It ranged from misleading the jury about evidence that did not exist to striking prospective jurors based on race. Two other juries deadlocked, but in the sixth trial, with one black juror, the jury convicted, and the Mississippi Supreme Court upheld the conviction, ruling that this time, there had not been any racial discrimination in jury selection. In arguments on Wednesday, most of the U.S. Supreme Court members did not seem inclined to uphold that conclusion. Chief Justice John Roberts pressed lawyer Sheri Johnson about what rule the court should adopt for cases "not as extreme as this"? The current rule that requires looking at the prosecutor's history is good enough, she said, but, here, the Mississippi Supreme Court didn't do that. Mississippi Assistant Attorney General Jason Davis admitted that the history of the case was "troubling," but insisted that aside from that, the jury selection in the sixth trial was done correctly, given that Winona is a small town, population of less than 5,000, where everybody knows everybody. Justice Samuel Alito interrupted to ask, couldn't the attorney general of Mississippi have said, "Enough already, we're going to send one of our own people to try this case, preferably in a different county?"Yes, replied attorney Davis, but the local prosecutor would have to request that, and Evans didn't do that. Justice Brett Kavanaugh interjected, "You said — if we take the history out of the case" but "we can't do that." Here, 41 of 42 potential African American jurors were struck, he observed. Lawyer Davis insisted that each of the potential jurors struck in the sixth trial was struck for a good reason. That brought an astonished reaction from Justice Elena Kagan, who noted that one of the struck jurors would seem to be the "perfect prosecution juror," because she strongly favored the death penalty, and her brother was a prison guard. Justice Kavanaugh noted that one of the reasons the court has embraced increasingly tough rules to eliminate racial bias in jury selection is because of the need for "confidence of the community in the fairness of the criminal justice system." And, he asked, "Against that backdrop of a lot of decades of all-white juries convicting black defendants, ... can you say confidently, as you sit here today ... that you have confidence in how all this transpired in this case?"Justice Alito posed a similar question, asking whether, in light of the history of this case, any court could untangle what happened in the first five trials from how the jury was selected in the sixth trial.Replied Davis: "Hindsight is 20/20."Civil Rights And Faith Leaders To FBI: Take White Nationalist Violence Seriously
https://www.npr.org/2019/03/20/705123229/civil-rights-and-faith-leaders-to-fbi-take-white-nationalist-violence-seriously

                A group of civil rights and faith leaders sent a letter to FBI director Christopher Wray asking him to take seriously the threat of white nationalism.
                
                
                    
                    Jose Luis Magana/AP
                    
                
hide caption
A group of civil rights and faith leaders sent a letter to FBI director Christopher Wray asking him to take seriously the threat of white nationalism.A group of civil rights and faith leaders are demanding a meeting with FBI Director Christopher Wray in the wake of the New Zealand terror attacks that killed at least 50 people as they prayed in mosques. The killer was a white nationalist who named President Trump as an inspiration in his online racist screed.The groups want the FBI to address "the threat to public safety" and to their communities "by white nationalist violence."Leaders from Muslim Advocates, the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, the Union for Reform Judaism and the Sikh Coalition all signed a letter sent to Wray on Tuesday, urging the FBI to take the threat seriously.  "Attacks against houses of worship in the United States have been far too common in recent years," the letter says.  The letter cited a spate of attacks by white supremacists on houses of worship in recent years, including the killing of six people at a Sikh temple in Oak Creek, Wisc., in 2012; the murder of nine African Americans as they worshipped at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, S.C., in 2015; and the slaying of 11 people at the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh, Pa., last year.  "What we've seen unfortunately over the last few years from federal law enforcement is a dismissiveness of this threat or sometimes even a deflection," says Farhana Khera, the executive director of Muslim Advocates, a civil rights organization and a signer of the letter.It's time to prioritize the threat of white nationalism.Farhana Khera, Muslim Advocates"After the horrific attacks in New Zealand last week, we decided that we as faith and civil rights leaders can no longer just stand by," she says. "We need to start demanding  action from federal law enforcement officials beginning with the director of the FBI. It's time to prioritize the threat of white nationalism."Downplaying white nationalismFollowing the New Zealand attacks, President Trump was asked if he sees white nationalism as a rising threat around the world. "I don't really," he said. "I think it's a small group of people that have very, very serious problems." But Khera argues this downplaying of white nationalist violence predates President Trump's administration. Khera points out that, when nine African Americans were gunned down in a Charleston, S.C., church in 2015, the killer was a white supremacist who said he wanted to start a race war. Yet then head of the FBI, James Comey, wouldn't call the murders an act of terrorism. That attitude has only deepened, Khera says, under the current administration. A report from the Brennan Center for Justice points out that, although counterterrorism was ranked a top priority for the FBI after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the Justice Department Inspector General's audit in 2010 showed only about ten percent of resources focus on domestic terrorism.  Meanwhile, right-wing extremists represent a disproportionate threat of violence, according to the Anti-Defamation League. Its report says that all but one of the 50 killings in the United States motivated by extremist ideology in 2018 were committed by people with some kind of link to right-wing extremism. One was linked to Islamic extremism. "It is my fervent hope that director Wray will agree to our request," Khera, the head of Muslim Advocates says. "He is the the chief law enforcement officer in our country and...we represent diverse religious, ethnic or racial communities that are being directly targeted and affected by this violence."In Wake Of Mass Shooting, New Zealand's Ardern Calls For Global Fight Against Racism
https://www.npr.org/2019/03/20/705062672/in-wake-of-mass-shooting-new-zealands-ardern-calls-for-global-fight-against-raci

                New Zealand's Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern visited Cashmere High School in Christchurch, which lost two current students to the shootings at two mosques last Friday that killed 50 people.
                
                
                    
                    Vincent Thian/AP
                    
                
hide caption
New Zealand's Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern visited Cashmere High School in Christchurch, which lost two current students to the shootings at two mosques last Friday that killed 50 people.New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern returned to Christchurch for the second time since a gunman killed 50 people in an attack on two mosques last Friday.Her first stop was at Cashmere High School, which lost two current students and one former student in last week's shooting, NPR's Rob Schmitz reported."It is OK to grieve," she told the students and faculty. "It is OK to help even if you weren't directly effected."Her visit came amid the first funerals of the victims from last week's shooting. Khaled and Hamza Mustafa, a Syrian father and his 15-year-old son, were among the first to be buried on Wednesday. Zaed Mustafa, 13, the brother of Hamza and son of Khaled, was also wounded in the shooting and attended the funeral in a wheelchair.
                Zaed Mustafa, in a wheelchair after he was injured in the mosque shootings in Christchurch, attends the funeral of his brother, Hamza, and father, Khalid.
                
                
                    
                    Mark Baker/AP
                    
                
hide caption
Zaed Mustafa, in a wheelchair after he was injured in the mosque shootings in Christchurch, attends the funeral of his brother, Hamza, and father, Khalid.The Mustafas arrived in New Zealand last year after living in Jordan as refugees. The boys and father were praying at Al Noor mosque when the gunman opened fire.Authorities identified Brenton Tarrant, a 28-year-old Australian citizen living in New Zealand, as the shooter and he has been charged with murder. Former Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd told NPR he felt shock and shame when he learned of the attack."I think any person who's been a former head of government or current head of government would feel that, if one of their own nationals was responsible for an action like this," Rudd said.He pointed to a "global...social media ecosystem of hatred" as responsible for the rise of far-right or alt-right ideology and "Islamophobic, highly racist" sentiment. The shooter wrote about a "white genocide" in a lengthy screed he published minutes before he carried out his attack.In an interview with the BBC, Ardern said that while the attacker was Australian, "that is not to say that we do not have an ideology in New Zealand that would be an affront to the majority of New Zealanders." She issued a global call to weed out right-wing nationalism. "If we want to make sure globally that we are a safe and tolerant and inclusive world we cannot think about this in terms of boundaries."Trump Backs Public Release Of Mueller Report
https://www.npr.org/2019/03/20/705162788/trump-backs-public-release-of-mueller-report

                President Trump says he looks forward to seeing the report of special counsel Robert Muller, who has been looking into Russian interference in the 2016 election.
                
                
                    
                    Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP
                    
                
hide caption
President Trump says he looks forward to seeing the report of special counsel Robert Muller, who has been looking into Russian interference in the 2016 election.Amid signs that special counsel Robert Mueller will soon complete his investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, President Trump says he looks forward to seeing the report and that it should be made public.Answering questions from reporters on the South Lawn of the White House prior to traveling to Ohio Wednesday, Trump said of Muller's report, "let it come out. Let people see it, that's up to the attorney general."Federal law requires Mueller to present Attorney General William Barr with a confidential report upon the completion of his work. By an overwhelming vote last week, the House called on Barr to release whatever report Mueller submits to the Justice Department.During his confirmation hearing in January, Barr said his goal "will be to provide as much transparency as I can consistent with the law," regarding Muller's final report, but stopped short of promising to release it.Trump again Wednesday insisted that "there was no collusion, there was no obstruction, there was no nothing."He added "I want to see the report and you know who will want to see it?  The tens of millions of people that love the fact that we have the greatest economy that we have ever had."Trump also criticized, although not by name, former Attorney General Jeff Sessions, who recused himself from the Russia probe leaving Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein to oversee Mueller's work. Rosenstein appointed Muller, a former FBI director, to conduct the investigation. Wednesday Trump said Sessions "didn't have the courage to do it himself," and said it was interesting "that a man out of the blue just writes a report," before again recalling his Electoral College victory in 2016.There has been increasing speculation that Muller has nearly completed his investigation. The Department of Justice had no comment on Trump's remarks, and Attorney General Barr was spotted eating his lunch with senior aides at the Justice Department cafeteria.Advice On How To Be Happy From The 3rd Least Happy Country In The World
https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2019/03/20/704585567/looking-for-happiness-in-the-3rd-least-happy-country-in-the-world

                Afghan couples in Kabul out for a stroll on Valentine's Day this year.
                
                
                    
                    Wakil Kohsar/Getty Images
                    
                
hide caption
Afghan couples in Kabul out for a stroll on Valentine's Day this year."Khosh amadee!" Omaid Sharifi, co-founder of ArtLords, an art collective, says as he invites us into his house in a manner that reflects true Afghan hospitality—with grace, a smile and open arms.The phrase is in the local language of Dari. Used to mean "welcome," it literally translates to "come with happiness" – which is a bit ironic because in the newly released World Happiness Report, Afghanistan is ranked as the third least happy country in the world. Only the Central African Republic and South Sudan are deemed unhappier.But on this particular night, it's hard to think of Afghanistan as an unhappy place. Our host welcomes us to his beautifully decorated house with its large garden. The house is older than the first wars that plagued the country 40 years ago and that often define the nature and personality of the country.Sharifi is hosting one of his famous soirees. His guests include well-known personalities like news anchors and politicians as well as social workers, corporate workers and artists, among many others.The invitees greet each other with a handshake and a kiss on the cheek as they take seats on the toushaks — Afghan cushions for floor seating — placed around the very large living room. In Afghan architecture, living rooms are specifically designed to be big enough for crowded gatherings."In the West, people often go barhopping after a long day's or week's work to unwind, de-stress and spend quality times with friends, but in Afghanistan where we don't have too many social public spaces, we go 'house-hopping,' " says Sharifi, as he walks around the large room, socializing and attending to the needs of the constant flow of people. There's cheerful chatter and laughter – and a diverse playlist of Afghan music, Western pop and Bollywood songs.Images Vs. RealityThis scene is a stark contrast to the widespread image of Afghanistan as a war-torn country, often imagined in the West to be gray and dusty, a place of repression and misery. This image was further strengthened by the 2019 happiness rankings, produced by the Sustainable Development Solutions Network and based on data gathered from reports across 156 countries on how happy their citizens perceive themselves to be.While there are a variety of factors determining unhappiness, the report focused on how information technology, governance and social norms influence communities. "There has been a widespread recent upward trend in negative affect, comprising worry, sadness and anger, especially marked in Asia and Africa, and more recently elsewhere," the report notes, observing that countries with a lower happiness ranking also "suffered some combination of economic, political and social stresses."The report is what brought us to the party this past Monday night. We wanted to interview Afghans to hear their perception on their relative happiness and unhappiness.Many of the people we interviewed did not dispute that Afghanistan has its woes."The last few years have been extremely difficult for all Afghans. We have suffered so much, and so many personal losses, it is understandable that there is a sense of frustration," admits Maryam Atahi, an Afghan social activist and communications manager at Save the Children. Atahi lost a close friend and a family member in insurgent attacks over the past year.Asked to recall her most recent unhappy memory, she choked at the thought of the loved ones she lost — and then in the same breath insists that Afghans aren't an unhappy people: "Afghans are resilient, not by choice but by need. We know how to celebrate life despite the constant violence we are subjected to if we are to remain sane and happy," she reasons before she joins in the Afghan circle dance of attan with her friends.Agreeing with her, Sharifi adds that while Afghans are exposed to a lot of negativity owing to the increasing conflict — Afghanistan had more deaths from terrorism than any other country in 2017 according to the Global Terrorism Index."There is so much negative energy that has been building around the country in a cycle of violence that has continued for the last 40 years," he says. "Everyone is transmitting that anger and discontent — all Afghans including the children are angry."And yet he does not despair. "Afghans find spaces and opportunities to break that cycle of violence and anger," he says, explaining why he hosts social gatherings. Sharifi holds at least two such events in a week, which feature traditional music and dancing, poetry recitation, bonfires and barbecues."Everyone is welcomed here, at any time, any day," he says. "If they need to talk, listen to music, or dance, we are always hosting."Behind Closed DoorsSharifi isn't alone in keeping the Afghan culture of hospitality alive. Since Fridays are a weekly day off — the Afghan Sunday — Thursday nights in Kabul and other communities around the country are set aside for socializing.But the events are often held behind closed doors and thick walls. There is a lack of public space for celebratory gatherings – and there's also concern about the strong disapproval from the deeply conservative Afghans who disapprove of such parties because men and women fraternize.Indeed, there was a time in Afghanistan not that long ago, during the Taliban regime of the late 1990s, when music, dance and entertainment of any kind was banned. But even the fear of harsh punishment didn't stop Afghans from celebrating back then, even if it meant doing so discreetly and underground.Government's RoleThe World Happiness Report asserts that governments and the caliber of their social services are directly responsible for a lack of happiness.In Afghanistan, the change in the government since the fall of the Taliban regime in 2001 has had little influence on Afghanistan's relationship with happiness, at least according to the report's rankings.The Afghans we interviewed said that their government is not providing the kinds of resources that lead to happiness. But they are sympathetic to the situation of the current government with its many issues to address, like managing the ongoing conflict with the Taliban and bringing the Taliban to peace negotiations.And Afghans understand all too well that true happiness cannot be found in a fractured society. In a study on psychosocial well-being in Afghanistan currently being conducted by Martha Bragin, associate professor of social work at Hunter College, City University of New York, and Bree Akesson, associate professor of social work at Wilfrid Laurier University, spoke to 440 participants from the provinces of Kandahar, Mazar, Herat and Kabul.Bragin, an American who has worked on research and mental health projects in Afghanistan since 2002, told us that many indicators of well-being were different for men and women, but there were some commonalities. "Solh, amniyat, adalat — peace, security and justice were the most important points for both men and women to be psychologically and socially well."Bragin further observed that the Afghans she has interviewed say they seek to participate in community affairs to seek well-being. "Afghans get great satisfaction from religious and cultural participation," she says, adding that they also "no one is told how to practice his or her faith."Big And Little JoysAfghans told us that they find various paths to happiness."Happiness is strongly linked to satisfaction and the satisfaction I derive from the work I do in Afghanistan is incomparable to anything else," says artist Kabir Mokamel.Reflecting the findings of Bragin, he emphasizes the importance of community in helping Afghans stay happy. "Being part of the community is very important to Afghans. Solitude is a foreign concept to Afghans," he says, adding that sharing emotions — joy or sorrow— helps Afghans find a sense of happiness."Even when you take a taxi, the driver will greet you like his own family," Mokamel says. "The conversations can get very personal very quickly, and you will completely forget about your stressful day. I haven't seen such interaction anywhere else I have lived," he says.Save the Children employee Atahi agrees that recent happy memories were made in association with the community. "I was thrilled when Rashid Khan [the Afghan cricketer] played in all the big leagues around the world. I get so excited when I see my friend Farazana anchor a news segment on TV. A lot of my happiness comes from my connection to my community and my country," she explains.Mokamel also credits the unpredictability of life in Afghanistan as a reason why Afghans live to the fullest. "Surviving an attack, for instance, adds a sense of appreciation for being alive, a reason to be happy. I can't describe it, but it is a feeling that elevates me," he says.There is, to be sure, a toll taken by trauma. In their paper, Bragin and Bree note that attacks and threats to life have become all too normal: "The negative effects of the unrelenting conflict on individuals, families, communities, institutions and the culture itself continue," they write.Hadi Rasooli, a psychologist from Herat, believes that many of the mental health issues in Afghanistan are "direct or indirect effects of wars and conflicts.""Our people experience high levels of negative emotions such as worry, pain, stress and sadness, and also effects of "hidden violence" within families," he explains. He counsels patients on such issues but notes that seeking help for mental health issues carries stigma across the country.A ParadoxAfghans are acutely aware of this paradox of searching for happiness in times of war and conflict. "When we don't get along with each other and fight with each other, [when] we face issues like terrorism and even poverty, as a result Afghanistan becomes an unhappy place," Sangari says.Yet that does not keep people from having happy moments and memories, even in the third least happy country in the world.Mohammad Baqir Sangari is a 40-year-old Afghan taxi driver who lives in a small home with his wife and children in the west Kabul. He recalls being happiest when he lived with his extended family. "I was born in war and raised in conflict," he reflects. "But when my father was alive, we used to all live together, had fun. [Those were] some of my happiest moments."Ruchi Kumar is a freelance journalist reporting from India and Afghanistan about conflict, politics, development and culture stories. She tweets at @RuchiKumar Hikmat Noori is an Afghan journalist based in Kabul who covers the intersection of culture and politics in South Asia. He tweets at @noori1st Gorsuch Provides Decisive 5th Vote In Case Interpreting Treaty With Indian Tribe
https://www.npr.org/2019/03/20/704926048/gorsuch-provides-decisive-5th-vote-in-case-interpreting-treaty-with-indian-tribe

                For those familiar with Justice Neil Gorsuch's record, his vote was not a surprise. He previously served on the federal appeals court based in Denver, a court that encompasses dozens of recognized Indian tribes.
                
                
                    
                    Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images
                    
                
hide caption
For those familiar with Justice Neil Gorsuch's record, his vote was not a surprise. He previously served on the federal appeals court based in Denver, a court that encompasses dozens of recognized Indian tribes.Every year, the Supreme Court hears dozens of cases, and while there will usually be a few blockbuster opinions, the majority garner little media attention. But these more obscure decisions can often illustrate something interesting, even unexpected, about one of the justices. And so it was on Tuesday with Justice Neil Gorsuch and a relatively obscure and underplayed Indian treaty case.On this conservative court, Gorsuch has been one of the most conservative voices. But in cases involving Indian treaties and rights, he is most often counted among those sympathetic to Indian claims.On Tuesday, Gorsuch split from his conservative colleagues, siding with the court's more liberal members in a case involving the Yakama Tribe and its right under an 1855 treaty to travel the public roads without being taxed on the goods brought to the reservation.Not only did he provide the decisive fifth vote in the case, he wrote an important concurring opinion for himself and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the leader of the court's liberal wing.For those familiar with Gorsuch's record, his vote was not a surprise. He is, after all,  the only westerner on the Supreme Court; indeed, prior to his 2017 appointment to the court, he served for 11 years on the federal court of appeals based in Denver — a court that covers six states and encompasses 76 recognized Indian tribes.The issue before the court on Tuesday centered on the Yakama Indian Nation and one of its members who owns a wholesale fuel company, Cougar Den Inc., that imports large amounts of gasoline from Oregon to gas stations on the Yakama reservation in Washington state.Washington imposes a per-gallon tax on those who import large amounts of fuel from out of state, using public highways. The state had assessed taxes of more $3.6 million on Cougar Den. The company and the tribe objected, contending that the taxes were barred by an 1855 treaty agreement between the Yakama Nation and the U.S. government.On Tuesday, five justices agreed. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote one opinion for three members of the court — himself and Justices Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor.Gorsuch wrote a concurring opinion for himself and Ginsburg using somewhat different reasoning. But the heart of the case was the meaning of the 1855 treaty that guaranteed the Yakamas the right to travel on all public highways. To the four conservative dissenters, led by Chief Justice John Roberts, that meant members of the Yakama Tribe would be able to use the roads, as every other citizen does, paying the same taxes and licensing fees. To Gorsuch and Breyer, that would be an "impotent" interpretation of the treaty originally negotiated.The Yakamas knew in 1855 that they were going to lose most of their lands. But the record, said Gorsuch, also shows that the Yakamas knew their land was "worth far more than an abject promise they would not be made prisoners on their reservations."In fact, he observed, the millions of acres the tribe ceded under the treaty "were a prize the United States desperately wanted." U.S. negotiators were under tremendous pressure to come up with a deal because the lands occupied by the Yakamas were important in settling the Washington territory."Settlers were flooding into the Pacific Northwest and building homesteads without any assurance of lawful title," Gorsuch recounted. So obtaining the Indian lands east of the Cascades became  "a central objective" for the government. "The Yakamas knew all this and could see the writing on the wall." They knew they would lose their lands, so they needed to "extract from the negotiations the simple right to take their goods freely to and from market on the public highways," Gorsuch said. "It was a price the United States was more than willing to pay" and "by any measure it was a bargain-basement deal," he added.  What the tribe got in exchange, he said, was a right it had had for centuries — not only the right to travel on public highways, but "the right to move goods freely to and from market using those highways," without having to pay a tax or licensing fees on those goods. The only thing the U.S. government gave up, and that the Yakamas insisted on in 1855, was the U.S. government's promise "not to impose a tax or toll on tribal members or their goods as they pass to and from market." The government is free to try to negotiate for more if it wants to now, Gorsuch said, but it "does not get to rewrite the existing bargain in this court."Antitrust In America
https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2019/03/20/704426033/antitrust-in-america
In this three-part series, Planet Money delves into the history of competition, big business, and antitrust law—one of the most important but least-understood bodies of law in the United States.Episode 1: Standard OilWe start at the beginning, in the late nineteenth century, with the story of John D. Rockefeller and Standard Oil. We visit Titusville, Pennsylvania where the oil boom was in full effect. We retrace the steps of muckraking journalist Ida Tarbell as she uncovers the backroom deals struck by Rockefeller, then one of the world's richest men. Tarbell's investigative reporting in the early 1900s inspired a court case that helped change the design of the American economy.Episode 2: The Paradox
                Robert Bork is shown in 1987. (AP Photo)
                
                
                    
                    ASSOCIATED PRESS
                    
                
hide caption
Robert Bork is shown in 1987. (AP Photo)If the breakup of the Standard Oil company was a turning point in the balance of power between enormous companies and the free market. The 1970s was a turning point in the other direction. In the decades leading up to the '70s, the government had grown increasingly aggressive—intervening in the free market to defend competition in more and more ways over time. Then a lawyer named Robert Bork completely transformed the way courts would interpret antitrust law. The approach to enforcement reversed direction away from protecting firms and toward a consumer focus, paving the way for today's tech giants.Episode 3: Big TechFor our final installment, we look at the present, and toward a future where markets may be dominated by tech giants like Facebook, Amazon, and Google. A new wave of antitrust thinkers is asking if the size and reach of these companies is a threat to competition, and ultimately to consumers. It's the backlash to the backlash introduced by Robert Bork in the seventies, and a reassessment of the relationship between the government and business in the United States.Disney Officially Owns 21st Century Fox
https://www.npr.org/2019/03/20/705009029/disney-officially-owns-21st-century-fox

                The exterior of Fox Studios is pictured Tuesday in Los Angeles. Disney's $71.3 billion acquisition of Fox's entertainment assets closed around 12 a.m. ET on Wednesday.
                
                
                    
                    Chris Pizzello/AP
                    
                
hide caption
The exterior of Fox Studios is pictured Tuesday in Los Angeles. Disney's $71.3 billion acquisition of Fox's entertainment assets closed around 12 a.m. ET on Wednesday.Homer Simpson probably won't become the newest member of the Avengers, but anything's possible now that Disney owns 21st Century Fox.One year after the Walt Disney Co. announced the $71.3 billion merger, it's official. The deal, which closed Wednesday at 12:02 a.m. Eastern time, reshapes the media landscape and makes Disney an even greater entertainment behemoth. In bolstering its trove of characters and stories, the acquisition also puts Disney in a stronger position to take on Netflix and other streaming companies when it launches its own service, Disney+, later this year.Disney, which already owns the Pixar, Marvel and the Star Wars brands, will now also get Deadpool and the Fox-owned Marvel characters such as the X-Men and Fantastic Four, allowing for the full Marvel family to be united. Disney also now owns former Fox television networks such as FX Networks and National Geographic Partners. Disney will also get Fox's 30 percent ownership of Hulu, giving Disney a controlling share of 60 percent..@TheSimpsons Thank you Fox and welcome Disney! pic.twitter.com/01uPrPsf7rNow that Fox Corp. has sold off most of its entertainment properties, it has become a standalone company that will retain ownership of its broadcast network, owned-and-operated network affiliates, the Fox News Channel, Fox Business Network and Fox Sports.Former House speaker Paul Ryan is joining the board of directors of the new Fox Corp. NPR's David Folkenflik told WBUR's "Here and Now" that Fox's decision to retain Ryan "is in keeping with the way in which Rupert Murdoch and his family has operated over the years, where they have acquired, essentially, a lot of major political heavyweights to be on their corporate boards, occasionally as top executives — essentially as a hedge" against the fairly heavy regulations that media companies sometimes face.Feels like the first day of ‘Pool. pic.twitter.com/QVy8fCxgqrThe deal has been in the works for more than a year, but wasn't official until various regulatory agencies around the world gave their approvals. After months of flirting with the idea, Disney and Fox announced in December 2017 that they had agreed to a $52.4 billion deal that would sell off most of Rupert Murdoch's entertainment properties. As Folkenflik reported at the time, the acquisition offered a chance for Disney to "consolidate holdings, bringing together talented leaders in television and movie production, major cable properties and a vast network of local sports cable channels to fold into Disney's ESPN programming."The deal hit a snag in 2018 when Comcast unexpectedly bid $65 billion to lure Fox away from Disney. But Disney was able to keep the deal moving forward when it upped its offer to $71 billion. The Justice Department OK'd the acquisition last summer as long as Disney, which owns ESPN, agreed to sell off 22 regional sports networks that were originally part of the purchase.For Fox, the decision to sell many of its entertainment properties was motivated mostly by "fear, opportunity and pragmatism," Folkenflik explained. "Fear of the seemingly bottomless wallets of Netflix, Amazon and possibly Apple to spend on new shows; opportunity to cash out assets at a possible peak; and pragmatism in finally resolving the professional fates of Murdoch's sons, Lachlan and James, as well the fortunes of four other Murdoch children who do not play a role in the company."The acquisition could have negative consequences. NPR TV Critic Eric Deggans told NPR's Morning Edition that thousands of people will likely lose their jobs as Disney consolidates its properties.Note: Both Walt Disney Pictures and 20th Century Fox have funded NPR.#AbledsAreWeird: People With Disabilities Share Uncomfortable Encounters 
https://www.npr.org/2019/03/20/704956960/-abledsareweird-people-with-disabilities-share-uncomfortable-encounters

                "There seems to be this sense where disabled people are kind of seen as oddities and forced to go through this world to be singled out and othered," says Imani Barbarin. "There's really no common sense attached when able-bodied people approach disabled people."
                
                
                    
                    Courtesy Madasyn Andrews
                    
                
hide caption
"There seems to be this sense where disabled people are kind of seen as oddities and forced to go through this world to be singled out and othered," says Imani Barbarin. "There's really no common sense attached when able-bodied people approach disabled people."The hashtag #AbledsAreWeird started with a childhood memory that occurred to writer and disability rights activist Imani Barbarin: she was in her community swimming pool when a man threw her crutch into the pool to "help her swim." Naturally, the crutch sank and she had to fetch it from underwater."I had no need for it at all — water is a great equalizer for people with disabilities — but he assumed that I would. So he sank my crutch and it rusted for the better part of six months," said Barbarin, who considers herself a pretty good swimmer despite having cerebral palsy in her lower half.Upon further reflection, she says she realized experiences like that have been happening throughout her entire life. People call her "inspiring" and "brave," pray over her in parking lots, and follow her into bathrooms to "help."